Detective Recapped here. Today, I'm
going to explain a drama film called,
"The Poker House", which is about the early
life of the director of the film, Lori Petty,
in a gritty and gang-infested neighborhood.
Spoilers ahead! Watch out and take care.
In 1976 in Council Bluffs, Iowa, there is a place
called "The Poker House". It's an ordinary-looking
house situated in an ordinary-looking
neighborhood. However, within the four walls of
the house, neighborhood pimps and criminals gather
to play poker and enlist the services of escorts.
The owner of the house is an escort herself
who was coerced into that kind of life. Her
name is Sarah, and she has three daughters: the
14-year-old Agnes, the 12-year-old Bee, and the
8-year-old Cammie. One morning, Agnes comes home
to their dilapidated home only to find a young man
exiting their bathroom in his underwear. It would
be a lie to say that Agnes is at all surprised
by this. To her, this is just another morning.
Several men come into their house every day then
leave the next morning after a night of hooking
up. Agnes convinces the man to leave their house
and even helps him get dressed. The man complies
with Agnes's demands and quietly leaves the house.
Agnes is now once again left in the cluttered
living room, scouring for something to eat.
She barely bothers cleaning up, knowing that
there's little hope for their house to ever
be set right. Before the sun rises, she rolls up
the stack of newspapers on the floor, binding them
each with a rubber band. She then goes to wake
up her little sister, Bee. As young as Agnes is,
she knows that she’s the only hope that her
sisters have. She stands as their pillar of
strength. Amidst the confusion and the harshness
of it all, Agnes looks after Bee and Cammie.
Agnes knocks on her door, and Bee goes to prepare
for her usual routine. The two sisters sit on the
floor and gather the rolled-up bundles of
newspapers. They put the rolls in the pouch
that Bee's wearing. When Agnes asks where
their youngest sister is, Bee replies that
Cammie's at her friend Shiela's place. Apparently,
Sheila's mother has tried to ban Cammie from home,
considering that she has enough children of
her own to feed. But there would be times when
Sheila's mother is too tired to kick her out,
especially after coming home from her second
job. Though Agnes reasons that Cammie's tiny and
doesn't take up much room, Bee explains that she
eats up all their food. To Agnes, this is a good
thing for Cammie since she might grow that way.
Agnes talks with Bee some more until it's time for
Bee to leave the house to deliver newspapers in
the neighborhood. Before Bee leaves, Agnes asks
if she could make her an improvised version of
mac and cheese using nacho cheese Doritos.
After hearing what Agnes had in her mind,
Bee sternly rejects her idea. Their inability
to make a decent plate of food speaks to the
children's lack of guidance and resources.
Agnes is keenly aware of this. She must have
been thinking of this when she thought of
Cammie eating plenty at her friend’s house.
Bee goes on to deliver the rolled-up newspapers
while Agnes puts on a vinyl record, listening to
a bass-heavy track while preparing for a bath.
While Agnes is getting ready to take a bath,
she spots a tiny mouse on the bathroom sink.
She takes a small paper bag and places the
mouse inside before gently pushing it outside
the window. Though she has every reason to be
spiteful and resentful towards the world, Agnes
maintains her kindness, and this extends even
to small animals. Agnes then takes a moment alone
to enjoy a serene bath in the tub. Moments later,
Agnes is visited by a man wearing a fedora. This
is Duval, her mother's pimp. Duval plops down
his gun along with a burger on the table for
Agnes as he goes on to flirt with her. Agnes
muses that Duval had kissed her a week before, and
her excitement upon seeing him again is evident.
Duval announces that he won in a card game
nearby and flaunts his cash in front of her.
They share a kiss once again, delighting the naïve
young girl. In turn, she excitedly reports to
Duval that she has a basketball competition coming
up that day. Duval asks Agnes if she loves him,
to which she answers yes. At this point,
Agnes tells Duval about the man from earlier.
Realizing that Sarah had a customer without his
knowledge, Duval gets up in a rage and goes to
beat Sarah. The young Agnes takes Duval's gun
and poises it towards him in the other room.
She thinks about how she doesn't want any part
of Duval beating up Sarah, but she does like
it when Duval kisses her. Before Duval notices
the gun, Agnes places it back onto the table.
After seeing her mother get beaten up, Agnes
changes her tone with Duval and refuses to eat
the burger that he brought for her. Any adult
would find it plain to see that Duval doesn’t
actually love Agnes and that he has no business
making out with a literal child. But Agnes isn’t
an adult. Agnes, through her young and innocent
eyes, sees Duval for much more than what he is.
Cammie wakes up at the Hightower residence, where
several siblings run around in a blur in the
perpetually loud house. Cammie's friend, Sheila,
tells her that she has to leave and go home.
Obliging, Cammie leaves the house with Mister
Hightower. Cammie and Mister Hightower have
gotten close over time to the point that Cammie
tells Mister Hightower that she wishes that
he were her dad. The kind Mister Hightower takes
Cammie to breakfast at a bar before going to work.
However, he receives an urgent call from
work, forcing him to leave Cammie behind.
Eventually, Sarah wakes up from her drunken
sleep and stumbles outward to the living room,
where Agnes is doing her homework. Anger grows in
Sarah's voice, with the woman becoming more and
more frustrated when she can't find what she's
looking for in the living room. To this, Agnes
says that she cleaned up the living room after
seeing it so messy. Upon hearing that, Sarah gets
mad at Agnes, saying that she wants to be able to
put whatever she wants wherever she feels like it.
This leads to Agnes feeling overwhelmed by her
fussy and unsavory mother. Sarah then teases and
forces Agnes to start being a call girl herself
so that their family could earn more money.
When she hears this, Agnes is pushed to the verge
of tears, but Sarah only teases her further,
saying that she won't be fourteen forever.
Despite Agnes’s attempts at having a semblance
of an orderly life, her mother shows no
appreciation of this. She’s even mad about it.
To Agnes, it feels as if her efforts are in
vain. But more than that, it feels as if her
mother wants them to keep living in such a dismal
state. Most heartbreaking of all, her mother wants
her to be a call girl. This is devastating,
especially when most mothers would struggle
against continents to keep their children safe
and to keep them away from such a tragic life.
At this point, Agnes recounts their life
before, back when things weren't as messed up.
Agnes and her sisters used to live with Sarah
and their father. Their father was a preacher,
so the three girls were much in tune with
religion. However, their father was abusive
towards them, physically hurting both
his children and his wife. Eventually,
the police came for their father, and the four of
them escaped to where they are now. After that,
Agnes still attempted to connect with God, but
her faith waned over the long and difficult years.
Meanwhile, Bee is almost done with her delivery
run and is now collecting empty bottles for some
extra cash. She then visits some local hobos who
are well-acquainted with her. While waiting for
the local general store to open, Bee tells the
hobos that she's going to be moving soon and
that she has Child Services helping her get to
a foster home. When the store owner comes in,
Bee and the hobos present their empty bottles
for the owner to buy from them. Bee uses the
cash to buy some candy that she could enjoy for
herself. At this time, Agnes escapes to her room,
where several posters of soul musicians are
plastered all over the walls while Cammie is still
at the bar, chatting with the bar owner, Dolly,
and the rather delirious alcoholic, Stymie. While
their home life may be in shambles, this doesn’t
stop the three sisters from getting along well
with their neighbors. Though they’re surrounded
by the seediest people in the Poker House, they’re
all still innocent, and they yearn for a better
life. This is especially evident with Bee, who’s
trying to get into a foster home, and in Cammie,
who longs to be a part of the Hightower family.
Before leaving the house for the day, Agnes
writes a poem expressing her frustrations with
her father and religion. The poem reads, "Never
called nobody father. Why bother? When you left,
you took God with you. Never met no preacher
who wasn't trying to reach her, selling heaven,
taking your sin home with him. Saw some funny
hats though when they made the new Pope, givin'
the sheep hope. Never called nobody father. Why
bother? Ain't no reverends, anyway. Revered ones
pimpin' the little ones who need God to be true.
Ain't no end to what they'll do. When you leave,
take God with you." This poem revolves around
the rejection of patriarchal figures. These
figures include the church, which is a response
to Agnes’s disillusionment with her father
together with the religion that he taught her.
After writing this down in her blue notebook,
Agnes leaves the house on her bike. She stumbles
upon Bee, who's eating candy nearby. Agnes takes
this opportunity to give her little sister a
scare. With Bee spooked and flustered by her
little prank, Agnes tells her to run home. Though
Agnes continually and playfully teases her sister,
she sincerely tells Bee that she loves her before
leaving. Agnes then heads to the local paper,
where she claims a check for her poetry
submissions. As she's practically an honorary
employee there, Agnes is friendly towards all
the employees. She then hands in her school
report card to the head of the paper, who is
impressed by her stellar grades. Afterward,
Agnes drops by a restaurant where she works to
pick up another check. Once she has her check,
she goes for a quick game of basketball with the
neighborhood kids. It’s made apparent that Agnes
is quite popular with everyone in town. But
aside from being a kind and well-liked girl,
she’s also multi-faceted and multi-talented. This
gives the sense that if she really wanted to,
Agnes most definitely has the potential and
the talent to break free from this sordid town.
Meanwhile, Cammie becomes increasingly frustrated.
She's been abandoned in a bar that she's
unfamiliar with, and she wishes for someone
to just come and pick her up. That evening,
Bee is practicing her saxophone in her room up
until things start to stir at the poker house.
By the time that Agnes got home, the debauchery's
already well underway. She sees their house
filled with the all-too-familiar characters
that populate their home every single night:
call girls, pimps, criminals. Then, sleeping
in the backroom is her twelve-year-old sister,
Bee. Agnes goes to Bee first by going up
the window to her room. When she gets there,
she tells Bee to visit Kelly's house that night,
even though she doesn't have band practice.
Without understanding why Bee does as she's told.
With her sister gone, Agnes lights a cigarette and
braces herself to enter the living room, the
melting pot of a crummy, backwater life. Once
she goes into the living room, someone hits
on her despite Agnes's young age. Meanwhile,
Duval has just won a game of cards by cheating,
but none of his friends could protest because
he brings out his gun every time someone says
something against him. It’s hard not to feel
for Agnes because her love for her sisters
is on full display here. She understands
what goes on in that house, and she attempts to
keep these dangers from reaching her sisters.
Though this means that she has to be the one to
dive headfirst into the darkness, she is willing
to do it to protect her sisters’ innocence.
Eventually, Agnes runs into Duval in the kitchen.
When no one is looking, Duval kisses Agnes, and
she kisses him back. Blissfully unknowing, Agnes
is flustered by Duval's kisses again, thinking
that they're a genuine display of affection.
Suddenly, someone else enters the kitchen, and
the two of them break it off. Later that night,
when it's just Duval and Agnes in the sordid
living room, they continue kissing each other.
Agnes remains delighted by Duval's kisses as she
keeps thinking that he loves her. But soon enough,
the girl is brought down to a harsh reality
when Duval suddenly takes advantage of her body.
Immediately after the horrid act, Agnes panics
and rushes into the bathtub. Distraught, Agnes
is in shock after having such a despicable thing
done to her, and she panics over getting pregnant.
She then turns on the water in the tub while blood
gushes out of her. Suddenly, a drunken Sarah comes
into the bathroom. She asks Agnes what she was
doing without the faintest glimmer of concern.
Crushed and devastated, the young girl reaches out
for her mother to come and embrace her. Without
even acknowledging her daughter's unmistakable cry
for help, Sarah only gives her some errands to do.
Poor Agnes just closes her arms and embraces
herself instead. If there’s anyone to be held
responsible for the three sisters’ lives, it
would be their mother, Sarah. But as it stands,
Sarah is too consumed by her obsession with Duval
and the drugs in her veins. And when she needed
her mother the most, all Agnes could feel from
Sarah is her emotional coldness and indifference.
Sarah recounts a story from when Agnes
was a baby. Even at a very young age,
all Agnes wanted was for her mother to read a book
to her. She mentions a red book that Agnes liked,
and she tells Agnes that she had asked her to read
that book so many times that she began to grow
sick of it. So Sarah made up her own stories while
she was reading the book over and over again.
However, Sarah remarks that she could never fool
Agnes and that she always knew what her mother
was trying to do even when she was young. The
drunken Sarah leaves the room, never noticing
her daughter's disturbed state. This telling
display gives the sense that Sarah has some
level of awareness of what she’s doing to her
daughters. The recounting of Agnes’s early life
indicates that Sarah knows that she can’t fool
Agnes into living a life that she doesn’t want.
No matter what she says, the truth will
surface and Agnes will come to understand it.
Moments later, Agnes barges into the kitchen
with Duval's pistol in hand. She overhears
Duval telling Sarah that he wants to start selling
Agnes, so Agnes points the gun at him. Shooting
the gun once, Agnes warns Duval not to move. For
all of Duval's smugness, he changes his tone when
the shot nearly hits him, and he realizes that
Agnes is making a serious threat. But Sarah would
step in the line of fire, protecting Duval from
Agnes. This only enrages Agnes, so she tells her
that Duval had just taken advantage of her. But
Sarah refuses to acknowledge what her daughter
just said, and she even defends Duval, asserting
that he takes care of her. The realization that
her mother is a lost cause comes, and Agnes could
only say that she'll be leaving. To this, Sarah
responds by telling her not to come back to her
house anymore. With that, Agnes goes out the door.
Agnes heads straight to her basketball game at
Ridgeview High. The game is already in the second
half and their team's down by thirteen points.
While she's still upset over what happened at
home, her spirits are lifted when she sees all the
friends she's made watching and cheering her on.
From the local paper employees to the kids she
played basketball with, to her co-workers at
the restaurant, and more—they're all rooting for
her. Amidst the miserable hellscape that swallowed
Agnes’s day whole, she’s still not alone. The
love and respect she doesn’t receive at home, she
finds in the people who she cares for and in turn,
care for her. It says a lot about Agnes that she’s
able to earn the affection and support of those
around her. In the next half of the game, Agnes
single-handedly brings her team from the brink
of defeat to a tied game of sixty points each:
a feat never before seen in the school’s history.
During the final four seconds of the game, the
superstar Agnes shoots the ball just in time to
score an additional two points, finally securing
their team's victory. That night, Agnes has broken
a state record for having scored twenty-seven
points in under seven minutes. Marching out of the
school gym, Agnes proceeds straight to her car.
Despite her victory, the horrors from earlier
continue to plague the traumatized girl,
and she goes through a nervous breakdown.
She eventually recovers, and Agnes pushes forward,
driving now in search of her sisters. She finds
them by a bridge looking down near the edge,
so she tells them to come inside the car.
Finally, the sisters are reunited after a
long and difficult day. She plans on taking
out Bee and Cammie to dinner in celebration
of her victorious basketball game. After
inserting a tape into the car's player,
the three jam out to the song, "Ain't No Mountain
High Enough". The sisters take turns in singing
the parts of the song as they ride out into the
night. Despite everything, Agnes takes solace in
the one redeeming aspect of her life: her sisters.
Eventually, Agnes leaves Iowa for New York City to
become an artist. Twenty years later, Agnes—or
Lori Petty—wrote and directed this very film.
In a way, the story concludes with an
anti-climactic ending. It’s natural to yearn
for a bombastically triumphant conclusion each
time there’s a story of hardship and heartbreak.
But ultimately, the Poker House is
a real-life story. And in real life,
things don’t always end in a neatly tied bow.
We don’t get to see exactly how Agnes and
her sisters break free from their unsettling
world, but in the final minutes of the film,
we do get reassurance that things will turn
out okay for the family. More than that,
this is less of a fully-fleshed tale but more
of a portrait of what it was like for director
and actress Lori Petty growing up in that world.
It’s a very personal film but at the same time,
it carries universal appeal as it gives voice to
young girls everywhere who find themselves in a
similarly deplorable situation, as well as the
trauma of being taken advantage of by cruel men.
Overall, the film is a beautiful take on how
three young girls refuse to yield their hearts and
spirits to a dreadful world and how they overcome
this darkness by finding strength in each other.
And this sentiment is displayed through
the scene’s final song sequence.